[\[archetypes\]]{#archetypes label="archetypes"}

The archetypes described here are simplified versions of those found in
the wild.[^1] The list aims for broad coverage: ideally, it should be
possible to match any real-world open source project to one of these
archetypes, with some adjustment for circumstances. Even though certain
archetypes won't be appropriate for Mozilla to use for the projects it
launches, Mozilla will still often encounter projects with those types
--- through engineering collaboration, through partnerships, even
through purchase --- and being able to discuss how best to work with or
influence such projects can be useful. However, we will devote less
space to archetypes that Mozilla is unlikely to ever use itself.

These archetypes are intended to help Mozilla with internal discussions
as well as with public positioning. Externally, it is important for
Mozilla to set clear public expectations about every project it starts.
This increases others' faith that Mozilla is a good project host and a
good partner to work with. For example, if Mozilla openly declares that
a certain project is going to be largely funded by and wholly controlled
by Mozilla for the next few years, and uses the project's archetype in
explaining why, then even potential partners who rely on that
declaration in choosing (for now) not to participate will still have had
a positive experience with Mozilla. Their belief that they *could*
partner with Mozilla on something will be reinforced, because Mozilla
took care to explain itself and not to waste their time.

It is perfectly fine to launch a project using one archetype while
stating a plan to switch to another down the road. We include a brief
discussion of the evolution of archetypes for this reason. For example,
a project may need to be tightly focused in its early stages, but plan
to change to a more distributed style of leadership and decision-making
once it attracts a community of diverse interests.

Each of these archetypes is presented with a brief description of its
key characteristics, including how the sponsoring organization could
best benefit from it. Usually this is followed by an example or two
described in some detail, followed by key points on licensing,
co-development, and community, and how tightly any components of the
project are related.

[^1]: There might be some important archetypes that we simply didn't
    think of. One of the fastest ways to discover them is to publish a
    report claiming to list all the archetypes and then wait for the bug
    reports to roll in; that is our approach here.
